Welcome to the Data Science Hangout, everybody. I lost my notes, but I should know this feel
by now. But welcome back to those who have been here before. And a special welcome to
those of you joining for the first time. For anyone who is joining for the first time,
just to let you know how it works. There's a few ways you can ask questions here. So
you can jump in live, maybe raise your hand on Zoom. You can put questions into the Zoom
chat and just put a little star there if you want me to read it out loud. And then you
also can ask questions anonymously with Slido. And so Tyler will share that link there in
just a second here. But just want to reiterate that we love to hear from everyone regardless
of what industry you work in, or your level of experience. So feel free to use that Slido
link too if you don't feel comfortable asking live. Just a reminder that this session will
be recorded as well. So we'll share up to the Data Science Hangout site in rstudio YouTube.
So excited to have you all here with us today. And thank you so much for joining us, Erin.
Excited to have you as my co-host. Erin is joining us from Charles Schwab.
Erin, I'd love to have you just introduce yourself and maybe share a little bit about
the work that you do on your team. Yeah, so I'm Erin Pearson. I currently work for Charles Schwab.
I've been there for almost two years. Prior to that, I was with TD Ameritrade,
who have been purchased by Schwab. So I've been in financial services for most of my career.
I mostly was in trading primarily up until a few years ago. I moved to a data analyst position
at TD and then moved over to Schwab. So now my current position at Schwab, I'm a senior manager
in trading operations, which is kind of a general term. My job is kind of to be the kind of go-to
person for my boss, who oversees multiple departments within trading operations, like
fraud and trading. I've kind of been tasked to be his kind of go-to person just for
random data-related things, different dashboards, ad hoc queries, looking at different data sets,
trying to identify patterns and things like that. So I'm still fairly new to the position,
so I'm still kind of figuring it out, honestly. We're kind of
just kind of going day by day and seeing what comes up. So still in progress.
I know you were a trader before and moving into this role, so I'd love to hear a little bit about
that transition as well. Yeah, that was actually what got me interested. I was a trader for many
years. I was a trader on our block trading desk, so I dealt with large trades, did a lot of,
used a lot of algorithms to do block trading. And through that process, I kind of started
looking at the different algorithms and kind of got interested in how they worked and kind of
thought, well, it'd be cool if I could do one of my own, so maybe I should study coding. So that's
kind of what started it. So I started looking into coding, started learning SQL and Python and R,
and through that, I kind of, my boss at the time on the block trading desk, he was incredibly
supportive and he said, yeah, you should run with this, so let's take you off day-to-day stuff,
you know, and give you some room to study that stuff. So he allowed me to do that,
so that's kind of what got me into it, and I just kind of, you know, kept going with it.
That's amazing. Was there a certain moment where you said, oh, I should do this,
or I can look into my own algorithm? I mean, yeah, it was just, through trading, we would
get exposed to more and more algorithms because different firms have different algorithms,
proprietary algorithms, and so I was just like, I could probably do this. I could do my own, maybe,
you know, I don't know. I don't know how hard it is. Let's give it a try. So I just kind of
started taking classes and just, you know, free online classes, just whatever I could get,
and then our guy over in data analytics at TD, who was kind of under the same umbrella as me,
who I'd known for years, I kind of started talking to him a little bit about what he did
and what I was doing, and it just kind of worked out that he actually had somebody on his team
leave, and my current boss actually reached out to him and said, hey, you should hire Aaron. That
would be a really good fit, and so I kind of started talking to him, and he actually hired me,
so that was kind of how I got my first job in data, because I don't, I honestly don't know
if I would have otherwise, because I didn't, I didn't know anything. I was, you know, I was
still learning. I was very new, very green, but luckily he actually saw that. Again, he knew me
for probably 10 years at that point, so he knew me. He knew I was hardworking. He knew I was smart,
and because I had all of that trading business knowledge, you know, he saw that value that,
you know, you can teach your teacher to code, but she understands, like, the underlying
data that she's looking at and what she should be looking at, and so luckily he recognized that
and gave me kind of a shot, so I was really lucky that I had really supportive people.
That's great, and that kind of brings up a point I know we talked about a bit earlier is how you
actually navigate huge companies like Charles Schwab or Ameritrade, and I think that's one
opportunity of doing that as well, like networking within the company to get you to the role that you
had. Yeah, that was huge. I, like I said, I probably would not have gotten that job otherwise,
you know. I don't know, you know, just freshly applying for something that, you know, where the
people don't know you, just looking at my resume, I don't know that, you know, any hiring manager
would have taken a chance on me. Maybe, but I don't know. I didn't, unfortunately, I didn't
have to find out. Yeah, it's definitely making those contacts was exactly how I got that job,
and even my current job when I was, so I was very happy at TD. I was a data analyst in advanced
analytics doing a lot of trading data, loved it, but I was, I spoke with somebody from the Schwab
side who, again, realized that I had some technical knowledge, and I had all that trading knowledge,
and that I would be a really good fit for their team, and so a friend of a friend kind of hooked
us up and talked about a position, and that's kind of how I got my current position, so now I'm in a,
it's one company, you know, because we are merging or in the process of it, but it's still two very
different companies, two very different data structures and organizational structures, so
it's been, I'm still kind of navigating the Schwab side because I'm not in a traditional
data position, you know, I'm not on a data team. I'm on a trading operations team,
the data person within that team, so it's kind of like on my own island. I don't have,
I don't have colleagues directly that do what I do, so it's been a journey trying to find those
people. I'm slowly learning, you know, you just, you kind of have to find this person and kind of
pick their brain and let them know what you're doing, what you want to do, what you're thinking
about, and then maybe they can refer you to somebody else who has this knowledge, and this
person has this knowledge, and you just kind of have to be patient and kind of, you know,
keep all those contacts open and be open to talking to people you don't know and put yourself
out there, but it's definitely, yeah, I'm still very much in the middle of it at this point.
I talked to a lot of people who are in that process as well.
How do you find the first people to go reach out to?
Well, I, I knew a little, the TD side, I knew a lot of people, so I did kind of ask a few people,
like, have you had, have you talked to your counterparts on the, on the shop side yet,
you know, do you have any names, and that, I did, you know, just ask my manager, because my,
my manager knows that I, you know, came over and I'm relatively new to the shop side, so he actually
gave me a couple names, he gave me a couple intros that kind of started that, so just recently,
within the last couple weeks, I've been introduced to a couple people
that I think will really kind of start to get me on the right path.
As a reminder, everyone, feel free to raise your hand to ask questions live if you want,
or you can use the Slido as well.
But Erin, as you start to, like, grow that community within Schwab as well, how does
everybody kind of, like, stay in touch or, or keep growing that community?
Well, we have, because we're a big company, we do have some set communities within, like,
data communities within the firm, so there's, like, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a.
So, there's, like, a, there's a Tableau Monthly Group that meets
that does, like, presentations and contests, and things like that,
and we also have a Data Science group that, which, which focuses more on, like, Python and R,
and again people present things, and we have chats in Teams, so you can always reach out,
you know, hit something up in the Teams and ask a question, or, you know,
say, I'm working on this code, and it's not working right, does anybody, you know,
can anybody take a look, or, you know, how do I download this package, or install this,
or, you know, we have those kind of channels that, where we can kind of
communicate with each other, which is really helpful.
That's awesome. I see there was an anonymous question that came in a bit earlier that was,
what ratio of R, Python, SQL, or other do you use, and what about most other data scientists,
traders that you know? Well, right now, I personally use SQL a lot,
but I know that it just kind of depends on what kind of team you're on, and what you
like to use, because mostly you can use anything for, for, for most projects, but primarily,
in my current position, I'm using SQL, like, 90 percent of the time, because most of it is
data mining, trying to find where the data is that I need, and then trying to put it together,
so that's, that's my, my number one at this point. I'm, and also, I, I kind of,
I kind of took a break from data in a way when I moved from TD to Schwab, because my position,
the first year, well, let me back up, so I was hired, and then my boss quit.
She actually went to a different firm six months into my tenure at, at Schwab, so that kind of
threw a wrench into my entire career progression, so initially, when I was hired, I kind of
was hired into the team to start learning what the team does, the day-to-day stuff. I was on the
regulatory reporting team, so I was learning everything that they did, and so that was kind of
what I was, was doing initially, and so I wasn't really working with data much, like,
a few queries here and there, but nothing, nothing, nothing data-focused, so then once my,
once my manager left, I was kind of stuck in that spot for a year, so I didn't really do a
whole lot with data, and then eventually, we kind of found the right place for me,
so then I got back into data, so now I'm kind of actually, I'm going back and kind of taking
classes to refresh myself on, like, Python and R, because it's been a while since I've actually
used them, so I'm hoping to use them more, you know, in the coming months, but I'm kind of
brushing up on things right now, to be honest. I know that that is a topic that had come up before
on a hangout, and someone else had experienced that, where they joined a company, and then,
like, 30 days later, their boss quit. Yeah, yeah, so I know we, we didn't get a chance to get to
that question a few weeks back, so I'd love to maybe hear if other people have experienced that
as well, or if people have any advice for others to get into that situation.
I don't have any advice. All I know can really be, like, the ground just shifting under you,
and in retrospect, thinking about when that's happened before, you know, I guess I would really
ground myself more to, to a higher, the sort of next echelon of purpose and, um, not, you know,
knowledge, so that you're not, you don't feel any kind of codependency there, which obviously,
which obviously, I mean, with your boss, it's clearly a thing. Uh, it's just to,
to keep ourselves independent is, is definitely, um, a mission and a, and a constant, uh, struggle.
Definitely. Thank you, Allie. Erin, going through this now, do you have advice for us as well?
Um, I think the only thing that I did that I'm really grateful that I did was,
um, when my, when my manager left, I was, I was like, what am I gonna do? Like, I mean,
the biggest mistake of my life, why did I move? I was so happy my previous job, like, what did I do?
Um, and I was, I was pretty freaked out, to be honest. I didn't know what I was gonna do,
I didn't know what I was gonna do. Um, but the, um, they, they slid over my, my now manager,
um, over our team. And so he, I was reporting to him and I just kind of started talking to him
about, like, this is not what I was hired to do. I could do a lot more, um, kind of bored,
you know, um, I just kind of started talking to him about what my skills were and what, um, I had,
what we had discussed my position being. And he, he was like, okay, let me work on that. Let me,
you know, talk to people. And, and luckily he, um, he cared enough to, um, figure out
the position that I should be in. Um, and so he was kind of thinking about hiring somebody to
be kind of his data person. Um, he was already kind of thinking about that. So then when I
approached him about that, he was like, oh, this could be perfect. You know, this will work. Um,
and so yes, would you want to do that? And I said, yeah, of course. So, um, just making,
making him aware of exactly where I was and, um, what I wanted to do, like that was huge.
If I wouldn't have done that, I don't know. Uh, I probably just be doing regulatory reporting,
I guess, which is fine, but it wasn't, you know, what I was hired to do. So I think that was the
biggest thing you just have to, um, talk to people and let them know, um, what you're capable of
doing, what you're interested in doing. And hopefully you have somebody that's in your
corner that will, you know, kind of help you get to where you want to be. Yeah. I think it's a hard
conversation to have to like, this isn't, this isn't what I was hired to do. Yeah. When I, when
I, when I talked to them, I didn't want to sound ungrateful or like, oh, I hate my job. You know,
you don't want to be negative like that. So I tried to approach it and, you know, like I'm learning a
lot, you know, straight, but like I could do more, you know, you, you hired me technically for this
job and I'm not doing that job. And right away he understood. He's like, yeah, that's not what
we hired you for. So we need to get you to do what we hired you for. So luckily he recognized that
again, I've, I've been very lucky to have a lot of really great management over the years that
have really kind of recognized what I can do. Um, and, and I've been really supportive. So
very lucky. Yeah. And, and well, as Nick just said in the chat too, good for you for,
for speaking up about that too. I see Allie, you had asked the question
on Slido a bit earlier, if you'd want to ask live.
Sure. I was just wondering about, uh, side projects within wall street,
uh, technologically based that are more focused on community development and education.
If you knew anyone who's, who's engaging in that, or if there's a department that,
that looks over that for, for Schwab specifically, I know within the finance wall street community.
Um, I mean, I don't know of anything specific. Um, there are,
there are different groups out there, um, that, um, that host things here periodically,
um, like different firms will host, you know, kind of data meetups and, um, uh, presentations
over things, but I'm not, not thinking of anything specific. Nothing's coming to mind.
Thank you. I appreciate your, your hanging out with us.
Of course. Thank you. And if other people know about other events,
do feel free to share them in the chat. I know there was the R there's the R for finance, um,
conference, and they, I think there was a call for speakers
that might still be open. I'll try and find the link that at multitasking.
Um, I see, and Nessa, you, you had a comment and a question here on that last conversation about
what to do when you say this isn't what I was hired for. Would you want to jump in and, and ask that?
Yeah, sure. Um, I mean, that's, that's the only thing I'm asking really, um, more like, yeah, what
I'm kind of curious as to whether the, the, you do know any advice for what might happen if,
you know, you, you have that, that conversation about roles about not, not quite what I was
expecting, not quite what I was initially told, but, um,
and yeah, I guess, I guess I'm asking if it's sort of less accepted possibly because,
you know, I guess there could be many reasons for that. Right. But
possibly if whoever hired that person was, you know, overselling a little, maybe
like how, like how to have that conversation. If, if, yeah, no, I'm just kind of curious if
you have any advice for that sort of situation. I mean, really the best advice is just to be
honest and let, let, let them know how you're feeling about it. Um, I mean, the bottom line
is if you're not happy in your job, you're not going to stay in your job and they don't want
you to be unhappy because they don't want to lose you. You know, if, if you're not happy,
you're not going to be doing good work. So, I mean, um, kind of like, kind of like what I said
earlier, like you, you have to be a little, you have to have a little finesse about it. You can't
be super negative and, you know, just say, I hate my job and give me a better job. Um, but you can
say, you know, I, I'm really interested in doing X, Y, Z, you know, and I appreciate this job. I'm
doing this, I'm learning this. That's great. Um, but I, I could also be doing more and I'm
interested in doing more and just, just kind of have to phrase it, you know, to where kind of like,
you know, what can I do for you? Even though it's really more for me.
That's very fair. Yeah. That's a great answer. Thanks.
I see there, let's see, are there other anonymous questions, Tyler? Oh, there was another question
that just came in that was apart from SQL R and Python, how important was a role of statistics
to you? Um, it is, it's, it's, I did, so I had, I studied statistics a little bit in college. I was a,
my undergrad was in a psychology major. So I did do some research and some statistics classes.
So it helped to have like a foundation. It's not, I mean, I wouldn't say it's a deal breaker,
but I think it's definitely helpful to just help you understand things when you're looking at them.
Um, I mean, I, I feel like it came more into play when I was doing like graduate work, um,
with classes, but my day to day, um, having just a basic foundation is good because you're just
doing kind of, you know, looking at like averages and, you know, just the basic statistics stuff.
But I mean, I honestly, I haven't really found an occasion to really dig into like
my old stats books and refresh things. Um, but again, that very much depends on your job. I'm
not, I'm not heavy in the weeds of the data world yet. Um, I might get there, um, as I,
as I grow my position, but right now, you know, um, that's not something that I'm, I've had to focus on.
Thank you. I, I see there's a conversation happening in the, um, chat right now about
different, like R in healthcare groups or R in pharma, R in finance and where people find those.
Um, and Jill, I see you asked the question, anyone know of R for healthcare group?
If other people have things that they know of or events, feel free to put those in chat too.
We plan a, quite a few different industry meetups, but still trying to figure out how to like,
keep that community going, like getting people talking, whether it's through Slack channels or,
um, or other formats. So I would always love to talk about that more. And if anybody's ever
interested in speaking at a meetup or I don't know, wants to, wants to just brainstorm about
I don't know, wants to, wants to just brainstorm about getting those community goings.
Let me know. Um, I see Sloan, you asked a question around networking. Do you want to
jump in and ask that one? Sure. Um, I was just curious, uh, if you have any tips for
networking within your own company, whether that's something that just happens naturally,
or do you take like set up meetings with people to try and get to know them to try and
build relationships that way, or any recommendations for how to go about doing that?
Um, I've, it's been pretty natural for me, I guess. Um, I'm a pretty shy person,
but I'm also pretty social. So, um, I was, I was with TD for 15 years. So I started there
really young, you know, when you're young and, you know, everybody's going out all the time and
you kind of build those relationships and then they grow over time. So that at TD Ameritrade,
it was pretty easy to just kind of, um, foster those relationships out of a social kind of
environment. Um, at Schwab, it's a little different because I, I started at Schwab in
the middle of the pandemic, or right when it started really in May of 2020. So I don't know
anybody. Um, I've only met, I've met my boss in person once, and that's the only person I've seen
live, um, that I work with. So it's a very, it's a very weird, um, kind of situation to navigate. So,
um, now my goal is to basically just kind of reach out, um, um, ask people, you know,
do you know anybody that knows this? Um, do you know anybody that knows anything about this?
And then I'll just hit them up in Teams and say, hey, so-and-so gave me your name.
Um, I'm hoping maybe you can help me or, you know, maybe we can just, you know, touch base and, um,
just kind of try to reach out and, um,
you know, um, on Teams is really my only, my only source at this point, but it's, you know,
it's, it's working. It's, I think the thing is you just have to be patient because you don't meet
everybody in the first day. Um, you don't ever, you don't meet everybody that you need to meet
initially, you know, it just, it kind of grows. Um, so you just kind of have to be patient and,
and put yourself out there and, um, participate in things, you know, um, usually, um, for Schwab
anyway, it has, it's a huge company, but they have a lot of little, little things that you can do.
Like last week we had like a, a Tableau contest for, um, St. Patrick's Day. You had to do a St.
Patrick's Day dashboard. So like, you know, I did one for that just to kind of participate and,
you know, get your name out there and, and, you know, you kind of meet people that way just, um,
by participating in any kind of like silly little challenges or discussions on things. Um, you know,
kind of keep, keep open to, to what's available out there and, and try to put yourself out there
as much as you're comfortable. Thank you. I think, uh, trying to navigate building relationships
virtually, I've found it, it, it requires a lot of intention behind it versus what happened
naturally in person. Cause I had a similar experience. I started my job March, 2020,
and I've met my boss in person, I think three times now. So we've gotten the number up a little
bit, but it's nice to hear that I'm not the only one that is kind of going through that experience.
Yeah, I think, honestly, I think there's a lot of people cause we've been in this,
excuse me, for two years now. So there's a lot of people that have started new jobs
in the last two years. So I think we're all, you know, kind of trying to navigate that together.
That's great advice. So thanks, Aaron. Um, looking to a few other questions, I see Ismael,
Ismael, you asked a question, um, I think on Slido. Do you want to ask it live?
Oh, sure. I put it in the chat. Um, my question for Aaron is like, it seems like you have a
eye or insights on finding good supporting leaders. You seem that you have to the multiple
supporting leaders. Um, how, how do you measure that? Or how do you find insights or determine,
uh, when a leader is like supportive or encouraging of your, in your career
more than just like a boss, you know, I'm curious to see your insight on that.
You know, I, I think I just got lucky. Um, I mean, I was just kind of blessed with having
people in my, in my, um, org that were great. I mean, I had people that weren't too, you know,
don't get me wrong. Um, like I said, I was with TD for 15 years, so I had several, you know,
managers over that time, but I just, I was really lucky with some good ones. And I mean, how you
figure out if they're good is you, you talk to them about what you want to do and what you, um,
are interested in and if they, if they care enough to help you or not, you know, some managers do,
and some managers are just your boss and do your work and shut up, you know. Um, but I,
I find that the majority of them, um, do have, you know, uh, an actual, um,
vested interest in making you better, um, the good ones anyway. So, and I do think that most
of them out there, um, are, you know, are, are willing to put in that work because otherwise,
why are they doing that job in the first place? Um, but yeah, you just have to, you just have to
put yourself out there and let them know how you're feeling and see if they are receptive
to it or not. But yeah, I don't think I did anything specific to, to find those people.
I think I was just very lucky that they kind of were in my orbit and I, you know, connected with
them. Thank you for that. Um, but yeah, great advice for putting yourself out there, right?
So thank you. Do you have those conversations about your like professional development or
career growth with those managers? Did you proactively schedule time with them or was
that just part of natural, like one-on-ones with the manager? Um, it kind of depended on
the person. Um, but when you're, so I've been in the corporate environment, my whole professional
career, and generally when you're in a corporate environment, you do have scheduled one-on-ones and
performance reviews and things like that. So that's, you know, that's always something that's
there and that's when you can talk about that. But, um, but also, you know, just one-offs, um,
you know, like, Hey, what's going on this week? What are you doing? Oh, I'm taking this class,
you know, I'm learning this. And then they're like, Oh, cool. What do you want to do with that?
You know, and you kind of just start kind of fostering the conversations like that.
Um, so it can work both ways.
Thank you. I see there, um, a few anonymous questions I'll, I'll go to. And one was,
can you discuss how you take algorithms and other deliverables from the lab stage
into production for Schwab, both from a technical point of view and also how you foster trust?
Um, well, no, I can't actually, um, I haven't, I haven't, um, utilized algorithms for a few years
now. Um, I really did that when I was actually in trading. And at that point, um, we just had
a surface level of algorithms. They were provided to us by, um, different vendors. So we didn't
have any internal, um, algorithms. So I can't really speak to that, unfortunately. Um, that
is something that hopefully, um, you know, I'll get into as I'm, as I'm here a little bit longer
and, and, uh, develop in my, in my current position, but yeah, unfortunately I don't
have that knowledge right now. I wish I did. Thanks Aaron. I see Mike, you have your hand
raised. You want to jump in? Yeah. Thanks Aaron. This has been a great conversation. I want to
come back to the discussion about managers again. I like you, I think I've been really lucky
in having a succession of really supportive and, and great managers and it, it transforms
your day-to-day work because they just are there for you and want to see you, you know, do your
best. I think it's harder if you run up against someone who's more obstructive, you know, who,
who isn't that same kind of supportive person. And I, I I've had it once and actually it's a
difficult place to be, you know, and to avoid it really, rather than it kind of bump up against
that person and, and have a fight or, or quit, I kind of reached out internally to, to find
another role that I could do and hit up my network and say, come on, you know, I'm fed up where I am.
What have you got? Um, but it's a really tough conversation to have with a man, with anyone,
you know, manager or not to say, I don't feel this is going how, the way that you
think it's going. So any thoughts or advice about, you know, having those difficult discussions?
I mean, yeah, I think if you, if you have that manager, that's not supportive, I mean,
you have to look elsewhere. You have to, you have to use your network. You have to reach out to your,
to your colleagues and maybe different departments or maybe even different firms and say, hey,
I need help. I need, I need, I need something to help me grow. Cause I'm, you know, I'm dying here.
So yeah, I mean, that's, that's what you have to do. You just have to,
if sometimes you can't change people. So if, if, if your current manager is not supportive,
they're probably not going to be supportive, you know, next month or a year from now. So how long
do you want to put up with, you know, being miserable in your job? Right. Yeah. You just
gotta, you gotta look up, look elsewhere and find, find something else, but that's really hard.
Definitely. It's also doubly difficult because of the fear of the unknown. You know,
if you've done that role for a few years or, or longer, then any change is going to be uncomfortable
or, or based on certain. Right. When I, when I leaving TD to come to Schwab was,
it was completely life-changing because I had, I'd been with TD since I was a kid,
you know, like that was the only company that I really ever known since college and
leaving all of my, my friends that I've made there and my, my really good work colleagues
and my network, you know, I had a really good, a really good network of people that knew me
that would, you know, sing my praises if I ever needed anything, you know, that just knew me.
And I can't, you know, coming to a completely different company was very, very scary, even
though, you know, it was similar, but like, yeah, I mean, the fear of the unknown is definitely,
definitely a real thing.
Thanks, Mike. And, and taking that a bit further, this question could be for,
for everybody on someone asked anonymously, does anyone have suggestions for how to gauge
whether a manager will be supportive, a supportive one during your interview process?
And feel free to put thoughts in the chat or jump into.
Well, I think that's one thing you have to ask in an interview. Like,
admittedly, I haven't been in that many interviews, because I've been with,
you know, the same firm for so long. But I think that's, that's definitely something
that should be on your list is, you know, how, how do you foster growth? Like how,
what are the opportunities for growth within this, within this position? Do you have learning
opportunities? Do you allow classes? Do you have internal classes? Like that's kind of the stuff
that you just have to ask to see kind of how receptive they are to that. I think if you put
that out there, and if they don't have an answer, that tells you everything, you know. But if they're
supportive of that, I think they'll, they'll already know exactly what to tell you. So I
think you just have to ask personally. One thing I would suggest is to talk to
other people that have worked for the manager. You can get a really good sense, even if the person
is not totally straight up with you, make sure you can see their face. So that's a great point.
Yeah, one thing whenever I've hired for a team is I generally have like the peers of the person
that we're hiring interview, and hopefully people are seeing more of that. If they don't give you
the opportunity, ask for it. Yeah, that's how, that's how my interview was. I, at Schwab, I
interviewed with the entire team. I had a call with every single person on the team, and then
two people that were, that worked closely with the team, but in different departments.
And that was definitely huge. That kind of gives you an idea of what you're walking into.
I didn't want to shift gears too quickly if someone else wanted to jump in.
Javier, I see that you asked a question in the chat too. It's a bit longer. I'm going to have you
ask it live. Thanks, Rachel. Hi, Erin. I loved your presentation so far. I'm just curious. There's a
great book. I read it a few years back. It's called Weapons of Math Destruction. I forget,
I forget her name right now, the author. She used to be a trader, algorithmic trading. She's now
kind of a big like data scientist for good type of figure. And yeah, that's it. Thank you, Trevor.
Kathy O'Neill. And so I'm just curious if in your trading days, you came across this situation where
I've heard that at least for some of the hedge funds, if you're an algorithmic trader, you can't
even talk to the person who sits right next to you. It's very much discouraged. Like people even fear
reaching out to each other outside of work for help on technical concepts. The idea being that
if you fail or quit, you leave the firm with just your intel and not sort of the greater scheme of
how the portfolio is kind of managing the portfolio. I'm just curious if that's something
you've come across. I'll say no, thankfully. I think because I didn't work for like a hedge fund,
I worked for a company who traded for clients. It wasn't, I was never in that kind of cutthroat
trading desk environment, thankfully. But I can definitely see how that could happen,
especially because within the trading world, it seems like people that I've known, you know,
so I've been in the business for 17 years. And there are so many people that I know that have
been at three different firms. You know, they flip flop and they're always moving around. So
that tendency to hold on to your proprietary knowledge, I'm sure is very prevalent. But
no, I did not. I didn't experience any of that in my positions because of kind of the nature of
what our trading desk did. Thank you. Thanks.
Thanks, Erin. I see someone else asked an anonymous question that was domain knowledge
and trading and finance seems like an absolute prerequisite. How do you build that knowledge
from the outside? For example, someone who's never worked in finance?
Well, I mean, I guess just reading about it. I mean, I always, I always
I always I was always interested in that. I said my undergrad was in psychology.
But then I worked at a bank in college and I kind of got into just finance in general. And
I realized I really like money and I really liked working with money. And so then I
thought, oh, I would love to trade. That would be cool. And I started looking into it. And
I just I found a job at TD Ameritrade for a starting broker. So I just I applied and I learned,
but I didn't have any knowledge coming into that. But I think if you if you don't
get an actual job doing that, I mean, there are so many resources out there now
that weren't there when I started. You know, even like Schwab and TD Ameritrade have classes and
classes and classes that you can take for free to learn how to trade. So really, you just have
to be proactive and find find sources out there because there are plenty of resources to to teach
you how the stock market works, different ways to trade, what what there is to trade and how to
trade it. So, yeah, I mean, it's it's out there. You just have to be diligent and go find it.
I absolutely love your approach that when you say, oh, I think I would be interested in this.
That sounds fun. And you just go do it. I think so many of us think that and we we don't necessarily
just go do it. Yeah, actually, when my when I got my data analyst job, that was one thing
my hiring manager, he mentioned to me once, he's like, you know, people talk about it, but I could
see you actually doing it. You're actually taking the classes on your own. So that showed me that
you were going to do it and that you were putting forth the effort. And he said that was like really
big for him to see. That's great. Ali, I see you had asked the question in the chat to around
networking. You want to ask that one live? Yeah, and I think you kind of answered it for me. And
you've definitely talked about it over the course of this discussion. But just if you were going to
kind of try to make a number out of the ratio of networking within the organization versus
like professional development with outside, what would you say the balance was like there?
For me personally, or what you should do? Well, both.
I mean, I probably, I mean, it's probably 50 50, but maybe a little bit more internally. For me,
I did. Once I moved to Chicago, I was more outside.
I participated in more kind of industry things like women in ETFs and
Security Traders Association, things like that. And that's where I made a lot of contacts that
way because I was in a bigger city. But before that was more internal. So I think it's, I kind
of had a good mix throughout my career of both, which I think is important to do both because
obviously within your organization, if you're going to stay there forever,
then people inside there are going to help you. But if the time comes where you have to leave
and do a career change or just shift companies, then those external resources are really going
to come in handy and help you with contacts outside the firm. So I think both are really
important. Thank you. And Trevor, I see you have your hand raised. Want to jump in?
Yes. Hello. Hi, everyone. So I have a question for you, Erin. You know, we have been reading
for years now, data and automation is actually affecting the finance industry,
not only in terms of accounting, but also in terms of trading, right? So people like us
are building algorithms that are being deployed at scale, right? So we read where
people have to re-skill, up-skill or change industries because of that. To what extent
have you seen that where you are and does that you think affect, I mean, people should consider
that if they're trying to enter the field of finance, is that something that's important?
Yeah, I think definitely it is. I haven't seen that last few years because of what I've been
doing, but when I was still trading, that was one catalyst that made me start to get interested in
the algo side because when I first started on block trading, I did a lot of manual trading where
you, we call it high-touch trading, where you're just firing off a lot of little orders
all throughout the day and you're monitoring things constantly, just manually. That was a
big part of my job. And then as the years went on, we started using algorithms a lot more
to kind of supplement that and it kind of shifted it to where like, it's kind of taken away my job
a little bit. Not exactly, but it was shifting. So yeah, I mean, I think that's, it's just
going to keep going that way, but you also still need manual interference to make sure that things
run right and that's kind of where people like us come in to make sure that those ETLs are running
and everything's working smoothly. But yeah, there's definitely been a shift over, I don't know,
maybe the last 10 years or so that I did start to see it when I was on the trade desk for sure.
So that's something to be aware of. All right, thank you.
Erin, there was a question earlier as well that was,
what are your favorite professional resources, podcasts, websites, or newsletters?
Um, I mean, I've, I look at everything. I mean, I took, I took courses through Udacity, Udemy,
LinkedIn Learning, um, um, you know, Code Academy, everything. I've, I've taken everything.
Um, so I mean, I don't know that I really have favorites. I just kind of, um, will search for
something like, oh, I want to, I want to, uh, you know, brush up on doing this, or I want to learn
how to do this. So I just look for a class and, and, uh, and find one that kind of fits what I'm,
you know, looking for. Um, yeah, I can't, I don't really have like a go-to that I always,
you know, go to for sources. Um, yeah, I kind of just look to see what's out there,
um, see what speaks to me. How do you keep yourself motivated
when you decide like, I'm going to learn this? Um, it's difficult. Um,
I think the biggest thing you can do is just, um, kind of schedule yourself a little bit,
um, and take a break when you need to. Um, so like this week, for example, I was going to take a new
class because I don't really have much on my calendar this week. I don't have a lot of meetings.
There's a lot of people out for spring break and stuff. You know, people take off when their kids
are out of school and certainly have a lot of meetings. So I was like, well, I'm going to take
some, you know, some classes. Um, so just start scheduling things. And, you know, if I'm,
if I'm reading through something or taking a class and I'm just getting burnt out, just
take a break, walk away, go walk my dog, do something, you know, just to, just to step away
from it. Um, I think that what I used to fall in, I used to fall into the trap of like, okay,
I got to take this class. This is a four hour class. I can knock this out in a day because it's
four hours, but you don't realize the mental, um, stamina you have to have to really sit through
that class and actually learn it. Um, so that's, I mean, I think that's the biggest thing is just
taking breaks and, and, um, doing, going at your own pace to make sure that it's actually
helpful to you. Don't just, you know, get through something just to get through it
because you're not really getting anything out of it at that point.
That's a great point.
I'm just scrolling through to make sure I haven't missed questions. So feel free to raise your hand
too, if you want to jump in and ask them live. I think that you had one earlier, Mike,
if you want to jump in
around domain background. Yeah. And it's kind of a, a balancing act. I was thinking of about,
I mean, clearly you've, you've come into this role with a lot of domain knowledge,
right? Um, and so if you were sitting with someone who's producing a model,
or producing some predictions and stuff, you know, you, you must apply, I, or, uh, you know,
I'm assuming you apply some domain knowledge to what you're hearing and, and then kind of balance
up. Well, does that sound right? Does that not sound right? Um, and I'm interested in, you know,
it, it seems to me a great fit to bring domain knowledge and then put modeling and data
techniques and, and, you know, experience on top. The other way though, is harder, right?
Because then, you know, someone could sit and torture the data for hours and hours and days
and days, and you could come in with your domain knowledge and go, well, why are you doing it like
this? So, you know, how do you balance up domain knowledge? And it's like, well, I wouldn't even
build a model of this, you know, because there's other people who are doing it. And, and, and, and
there's other things that you could do versus the, the kind of data centric site. I think that's,
that's why it's really important to have well-rounded team or colleagues that you can go
to that have that, you know, that compliment you. Um, we had, uh, I can't remember the details,
but I remember when, when I was a data analyst, um, there was something that we were working on,
um, me and a, and a colleague who was not that business savvy, he was newer to the company.
Um, and I remember we were going over something and we, we pulled, you know, we, we queried some,
some data and I was like, well, that's not right. And he's like, why isn't it right? I'm like,
cause that's not right. That's not, it was, it was like, um, I think it was like trading volume
related or something. Um, it was something that I knew that that didn't look right, you know, um,
but he didn't know it didn't look right. And so we had to, you know, we had to kind of, um, pull
our talents to try to figure out like, why isn't that right and how to get it right. Um, so yeah,
I mean, I think nobody knows everything, you know, I'm, um, I'm, uh, I'm certainly more
business knowledge than, than technical knowledge, but I'm still working on my technical knowledge
and there's people that are the opposite, but yeah, you just, you have to find those people
that compliment you to try to work together to, to get that, um, you know, ultimate goal reached.
Um, but yeah, I can see it's, I can see how it would be much harder coming, knowing, um,
being very highly technical, but not knowing what you're talking about, um, in real life. Um,
that was actually, that was another thing that kind of, um, initially made me want to get into
kind of a tech world, um, because I would talk to these tech guys and they just, they didn't
seem human. They didn't know how to speak to me. Um, and I thought, well, I'm smart. I could
probably learn this stuff. Maybe I could like translate between the two groups of people,
you know? Um, I think we need more of that in, um, in all industries because I think they are
very segregated, um, those two kinds of worlds. And I think the more people that we have that can,
can speak to both sides, I think that's where, um, that's where we need to be going.
I wonder whether it, having that background in the domain leads you to kind of not go down the,
the, the more complex model rabbit holes and rather you're kind of looking for,
um, simpler, more explainable models, let's say like that.
Yeah, that could be, I mean, um, yeah, you're gonna, you're gonna, um, you know, shift to where
you're comfortable. So yeah, which again, I think is another reason why you need, um, people that
compliment you that can push you, um, outside of your comfort zone to get the best result.
No, it's, it's, it's good to hear that. I think it matches my feeling that you need both
in a data team to kind of counterbalance each other.
Yep. I think it's definitely helpful no matter, no matter what you're working on,
no matter what industry and I think it's, it's, it's made beneficial for, for whatever you're
doing. I really like that idea or the point about needing more people that can be
the translator in between the very technical and business side.
And how do people like that? Yeah. But are there a lot of
companies hiring for roles like that or what, what are those roles?
I don't know, you know, that's, that's just kind of what I think there should be. I don't know if
it is out there. I don't know if that exists, but I think it should. Um, and that's kind of
what I would like to do, um, or, you know, eventually be, you know, to be, to be the, um,
to be the expert on both sides, you know, like, oh yeah, she can talk technical, go talk to her
or yeah, she can explain like, you know, the, the logistical side and, you know, the business side,
you know, um, yeah. I mean, I don't know if there's an actual position that, um,
that is called like a, you know, technical liaison or something like that. I don't know,
but I think it definitely should exist. That's one of the reasons I've called myself
professional geek, you know, because I, I find myself in that translator role or in that kind
of in-between role and it's tough because I've never fit a machine learning model in my life,
you know, and yet I'm kind of sitting alongside data scientists.
But you can, you can understand them and you can speak to them, which is very important.
I see Melody said product managers are general, generally this translator type position.
Yeah, can be.
I see Eric, you're, you commented in that you can relate to this as well. Do you want to weigh in?
Yeah, it's always been one of those things where it's never in a typical like statistician or data
scientist job description where I work, but because like Mike said, I'm definitely a fellow
geek of many things in tech and made a lot of great relationships with our research IT group.
So I'm often helping people connect dots or translate concepts from the stats side to the
IT DevOps side and vice versa. But I personally think that should be recognized more, but that's a
much broader discussion that we don't have time for here.
I love Tatsu's analogy. Well, I love all restaurant analogies.
Tatsu, you said I would translate between the front of the house and the back of the house.
Ismael, I see you have your hand raised.
Sorry, Rachel. I was just gonna. Yeah, I think I love this conversation because I think that
it happens everywhere, right? It's not just, you know, this industry, it's across the board.
And yeah, it's funny because people can't talk to other people. And yeah, with my analogy,
I worked as a sushi chef on the line and you would not believe, you know, how heated things
would get when your server needs to get this order out immediately. But you've got a stacked
line of orders and these chefs are, you know, working their tails off. They don't want to hear
that. But you have to go about it in a way that you can actually serve the customers, right?
Like that's the end goal. And yeah, it takes a little bit of finesse. I definitely think it
takes somebody that can, you know, understand, you know, the big picture and like take input
and actually, you know, make it into something actionable, right? And actually produce a result
that is going to be, you know, the best outcome for everybody. So yeah, I love this conversation.
And I've just thought of the job title for these people, these translator people. If they're
internal to your company, they don't have a name. If they're external to the company,
they're called consultants and they make 5x your salary.
Yeah. Good point, Mike.
I mean, are they?
Internal consultants, can we call ourselves?
Do we just call them empaths? Like, is that what it is?
Aaron said the Bob's from office space. Yes. Ismael, I see you have your hand raised too,
if you want to jump in.
Yeah, no, I agree with what Tetsu was saying about like, you know, using a picture of a
speech, like explaining how like a model could relate to a restaurant. I think like a key part,
at least for my success about getting buy-in from executives or different parts of the business on
different analytic solutions from machine learning to just automating a report that used to be an
Excel report, comes to like sharing a story. At least personally, I see a lot of non-technical
individuals, once they understand like the metaphor or, you know, something similar they
can relate to. Like I work in finance, so like we're trying to talk about like attrition models
for customers. And if I start going to explain the math of them, I'm like, you would try to
identify a new like $20 bill that is fake, but we have all these tellers, you know, test different
results, probably different input. And we gather that, you know, as a voting, I was just trying to
explain the model, but like we can use stories. I think a lot of the non-technical individuals
really have that translation. And once they have that clicked in, it's a lot easier to continue
building more technical knowledge to them. But I love the restaurant analogy, that's great.
Great points. And thank you all so much. And Aaron, I was just wondering, what's the best
way for people to get in touch with you, if they have follow-up questions or want to connect?
LinkedIn's great.
Okay, cool. Thank you so much, Aaron, for sharing all your insights with us and experience. This was
great.